# GAP

Hang gliding and paragliding competitions are scored measuring pilots against
one another along several axes. The exact combination of formulae we call GAP,
after the initials of the first names of the three inventors of this method.
The vario flying instruments pilots carry with them are also GPS receivers and
are able to log fairly accurate position fixes every few seconds for many hours
as needed for longer flights.

The official scoring program for hang gliding and paragliding competitions is
[FS](http://fs.fai.org/). Outputs for a scored competition task are mingled
with inputs in the `*.fsdb` file. Once scored, a task and competitions reports
can be made. These simple static html pages with tables of pilot scores can be
hosted on any web server when publishing the results. In addition to the points
scored, there are columns in the task table for the time on course, the
distance flown and for the breakdown of the scored points among distance
points, lead points, time points and arrival points.

Looking for examples? There is a good archive of past Forbes Flatlands
[competition results](http://www.forbesflatlands.com/results/past-results), for
instance results for [task
1](https://www.forbesflatlands.com/results-show?id_results=7&db=results2013&class=results_open)
of the 19th World Hang Gliding Champs.

Commission Internationale de Vol Libre (CIVL - Hang Gliding and Paragliding
Commission) is an Air Sport Commission (ASC) of the Fédération Internationale
Aéronautique (FAI). CIVL produce FS. It is the work of paid and volunteer
developers.

The scoring method is [well
documented](http://fs.fai.org/trac/wiki/ScoringFormulas). Principal documents
are;

* [Sporting Code Section 7A - Annex
  GAP](https://www.fai.org/sites/default/files/documents/sporting_code_s7a-xc-civl_gap_annex_1.pdf)
  - The definitive guide produced and maintained by CIVL.
* [GAP
  2002](http://fs.fai.org/trac/raw-attachment/wiki/ScoringFormulas/GAP02_en.pdf)
  - A much shorter and less formal guide that is a good first read to gain an
  understanding of why GAP is needed and how it works.
